--- PAGE 1 ---
Automated Tooth Segmentation in X-ray Images
using Attention Integrated U-Net++ Model
Abstract—Oral functioning, the ability to perform 
various oral functions, pain-free and without being ill, is 
one of the indicators of overall well-being and life 
satisfaction. Even though these diseases are mostly 
preventable, a majority of individuals all over the world 
suffer from periodontal disease, dental caries, and oral 
malignancies to an estimated of 5 billion people 
worldwide. However, there are still use of traditional 
radiographic techniques like periapical and panoramic 
radiography that assist in diagnosis. A better diagnosis is 
enhanced through the use of modern techniques in 
imaging such as MRI, ultrasonography and CBCT 
imaging. Deep learning-based solutions enhance 
diagnostic capabilities through dental segmentation in 
images since they learn from unmodified data in 
contrast to traditional machine learning and deep 
learning techniques which produce inferior results when 
dealing with massive datasets. Therefore, in an effort to 
solve the problem of efficient dental segmentation, 
anencoder-decoder basedtooth segmentation model 
based on U-Net++ architecture modified using Efficient 
Channel Attention Network is proposed that aims at 
enhancing the accuracy of dental diagnosis. The paper 
also focus of the performance of different state-of-art 
CNN techniques namely, U-Net, FCNs, ENet, U-Net++, 
U-Net 3+, SwiftNet on the standard Tuffs Dental dataset
for model selection and comparisons. The proposed
model outperforms other segmentation models and
achieves the best mean average precision of 96.4% and a
dice coefficient of 90%.
Keywords - Convolutional Neural Networks, Deep 
Learning Tufts Dental database, Models MRI, U-Net++, 
Segmentation 
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, dental health tends to be a major indicator of 
overall health and life satisfaction. The capacity to 
articulate, smile, discern tastes, touch, chew, ingest, and 
employ gestures to convey a range of emotions while 
avoiding pain, discomfort, and craniofacial diseases is all 
included in oral health. The most frequent oral disorders are 
periodontal disease, often known as gum disease, dental 
caries, tooth decay, and oral cancers. Despite being mostly 
avoidable, oral disorders are persistent, impacting over 3.5 
billion people globally. Dental caries, the most common 
disease in the world, is becoming more widespread. 
Radiographs are helpful tools that may be used in between a 
clinical examination to diagnose dental problems. 
Panoramic and periapical radiographs are often used and 
 
 provide information for routine treatments. However, 
limitations arise when projecting the entirety or a portion of 
the oral cavity onto a two-dimensional image plane. To 
address these issues and provide additional information 
needed for the diagnosis or treatment planning of specific 
patients, new three-dimensional imaging techniques are 
needed. There is the cone beam computed tomography, 
abbreviated as CBCT, the magnetic resonance imaging 
known as MRI, and ultrasound imaging. The entire orofacial 
region, encompassing the jaws, teeth, sinuses, and 
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is visible on panoramic 
radiographs. These images are highly informative for 
illustrating abnormalities or phases of oral growth, as well 
as acting as a preliminary assessment for widespread illness 
or numerous problems.Convolutional Neural Networks 
(CNNs) have shown effectiveness in several dental imaging 
applications, like segmentation and categorization of 
anomalies in dental X-ray images, according to an 
increasing amount of research. The Tufts Dental Database, a 
large dataset of 1000 panoramic dental radiographs 
painstakingly categorized by experts, is one important 
addition to this order. Traditional methods for analyzing 
dental images frequently depend on machine learning 
techniques that require complex feature engineering and 
preprocessing. Although these techniques have succeeded, 
they face issues with efficiency, performance, and 
scalability when applied to larger datasets. Recent 
advancements in deep learning, including attention 
mechanisms and transformers, have revolutionized this 
field, enabling neural networks to learn directly from raw 
data and overcome these challenges.This paper aims to 
improve upon existing methods by developing an automated 
tooth segmentation system based on the U-Net++ 
architecture, modified with attention mechanisms to 
enhance segmentation accuracy in panoramic radiographs. 
Unlike traditional approaches, the proposed model directly 
leverages deep learning to improve segmentation precision, 
thereby addressing the limitations of prior methods. By 
using advanced neural network designs and preprocessing 
techniques, the model demonstrates superior segmentation 
performance, paving the way for more accurate and efficient 
dental treatment models and diagnostics. 
Paper Organization:The rest of the paper is organized as 
follows. In Section II, we present a detailed review of 
related work in the field of automated tooth segmentation 
and the various deep learning models used. Section III 
describes the methodology, including the architecture of the 
proposed U-Net++ model and the integration of the 
Julakanti Sai Yaswanth 
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering 
Amrita School of Computing, Bengaluru 
 Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, India. 
bl.en.u4cse21074@bl.students.amrita.edu 
Kanderi Johith Kumar  
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering 
Amrita School of Computing, Bengaluru 
 Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, India. 
bl.en.u4cse21086@bl.students.amrita.edu 
Rimjhim Padam Singh 
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering 
Amrita School of Computing,Bengaluru 
 Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, India. 
ps_rimjhim@blr.amrita.edu 
1317
2025 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Systems, Advanced Computing and Communication (ISACC)
979-8-3315-2389-3/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
2025 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Systems, Advanced Computing and Communication (ISACC) | 979-8-3315-2389-3/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISACC65211.2025.10969266
--- PAGE 2 ---
Efficient Channel Attention (ECA) mechanism. Section IV 
outlin
es the experiments conducted, including dataset 
preparation, training procedures, and performance metrics. 
In Section V, we discuss the results, compare the proposed 
method with existing techniques, and highlight its 
advantages. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and 
suggests possible directions for future research. 
II. RELATED WORK
Leea et al. [1] sought to determine the effectiveness of deep 
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in differentiating 
dental cavities from periapical X-rays. In total, three 
thousand photographs were used. Regarding pretext 
processing, CNN is used and Inception V3 for transfer 
learning. They demonstrated a high diagnostic performance 
in molar, premolar, and combined configurations and 
identified that the premolar configuration performed the best 
in terms of the AUC. Hussain et al. [2] employed several 
state-of-the-art techniques on deep learning to segment brain 
tumors. Theirproposed architecture predicts the outputs for 
corresponding labels andtheir algorithm works for the over-
fitting. The work also employed the pre-processing steps 
such as N4ITK bias field correction. Stember et al. [3] 
compared the manual annotations with segmentation masks 
derived from data logged by eye-and-hand-recording 
equipment used for deep learning in medical imaging. They 
analyzed 19 radiologic screenshots and 356 T1-weighted 
contrast-enhanced meningioma pictures and proved that 
both masks are significantly different from each other with 
very high Dice similarity coefficient. The outcomes showed 
that although there are differences between the two types of 
masks, they do not significantly affect the CNNs 
performance, and further explained why eye tracking is so 
useful for deep learning segmentation. 
Muresan et al. [4] described one new method, which is 
developed over deep learning and advanced image 
processing to understand the location of teeth and categorize 
the various dental abnormalities in panoramic X-ray 
images.A dataset including 14 distinct dental illnesses and 
after using annotated data to train their model for semantic 
segmentation, they segmented and improved the bounding 
boxes that corresponded to the tooth determinationsusing a 
variety of image processing operations. Within the 
discovered region of interest, each tooth occurrence was 
tagged and the issue impacting it was determined by a 
majority vote method based on a histogram. Panetta et al [5] 
employed a dataset consisting of one thousand panoramic 
dental radiography pictures. The researchers categorized 
these images into five categories: Peripheral features, 
radiodensity, appendicular load, effect on neighbouring 
tissues or organs and abnormality profile.  This dataset's 
main goal is to improve tooth segmentation algorithms. 
Notably, in their studies, using convolutional neural network 
produced the best accuracy.  
Sultan et al. [6] utilized panoramic images of radiographs 
for performing teeth segmentation with the help of a noise-
reduced encoder-based residual U-Net model. In this paper, 
the authors pre-processed the dataset that contains 1000 
images and then used their proposed residual U-net CNN 
model which tries to predict the teeth defects using the 
denoised encoder block of the model. Ghahremani et al. [7] 
separated cavities and dental restorations in X-ray pictures 
by using convolutional neural networks. Using the Universal 
Teeth Numbering (UTN) system, the procedure entails 
determining the quantity and placement of each tooth.They 
achieved great accuracy and recall by addressing problems 
with teeth ordering and prediction in X-ray images. Next, 
each tooth's picture was cropped so that the cavity and 
repair are precisely segmented. Through the identification of 
abnormalities that individuals might not detect, their 
strategy lessens responsibility and lowers prejudice in 
treatment assessment 
Merter et al. [8] proposed deep learning models for the 
segmentation of teeth and maxillomandibular region. Their 
work utilizes medical image segmentation techinques such as 
Segmenter, Vision Transformer (ViT), and U-Net, which 
outperformed all the other benchmark models. EhaRenwi et 
al. [9] used a U-net model for the task of segmenting images 
of the teeth from the X-ray. On the same network, U-Net was 
also employed to perform data pre-processing by 
normalizing gamma plus applying histogram equalization. 
On the same note, U-Net was better off than the other deep 
learning structures. 
Csaba et al. [10] explored the use of convolutional neural 
networks especially U-Net, for dental radiology's medical 
image segmentation. They concentrated on the difficult task 
of segmenting dental restorations, including fillings, crowns 
and root canal treatments, on panoramic radiographs because 
of their varying shapes and sizes. 1781 panoramic 
radiographs were used that specialists annotated for various 
dental restorations tasks. For training, the dataset was 
divided into multiple tiles, with the number of tiles ranging 
from 2 to 20. An encoder-decoder structure with skip links 
made up the model. With increase in number of tiles utilized, 
the F1-score increased, demonstrating major improvements 
in segmentation accuracy, particularly for root canal fills. 
SenbaoHou et al. [11] discussed the U-Net concept and the 
use of the Squeeze-Excitation Module in the integration of 
the encoder and the decoder. They proved that in order to 
overcome semantic gap, one needs to employ thick skip 
connections. Besides, they got features regarding the shapes 
of teeth with an aid of Multi-scale Aggregation Attention 
Block (MAB). At the bottleneck layer, they established a 
Dilated Hybrid Self-Attentive Block (DHAB) that is 
specifically capable of disregarding irrelevant background 
details. 
  Çelik et al. [12] used ten different models for 
identifying periapical lesions investigation. Furthermore, the 
effectiveness of these models was assessed on other 
datasets. According to the research, periapical lesions on 
periapical radiographs (PRs) may be reliably predicted by 
the deep learning models RetinaNet and adaptive training. 
Silva et al.[13] discussed the challenges that dentists faced 
when evaluating X-rays and proposed computational 
tools to help with automated tooth identification and 
categorization. They concentrated on using deep learning 
techniques, specifically four network frameworks which are 
Mask R-CNN, ResNeSt, PANet, and HTC to divide and 
recognize teeth in panoramic X-rays. PANet performed the 
best in segmentation and numbering. 
1318
--- PAGE 3 ---
Chahal et al. [14] integrated two-pathway and cascade 
structures for the analysis to learn spatial, depth-wise 
features and dependencies of neighboring labels for more 
accurate segmentation for implementation of brain 
segmentation. There are two types of cascade frameworks 
used: MFC Cascade and Input Cascade. The MFC Cascade 
performs worse than the Input Cascade. The proposed 
methodology involves slicing 3D MRI scans into 2D slices 
for processing, addressing class imbalance issues due to 
fewer tumor slices compared to non-tumor slices.  
Ali et al. [15] aimed to provide a fuzzy clustering 
algorithm for the segmentation of dental X-ray images, 
based on indeterminate orthogonal matrices. Their work 
discusses the difficulties caused by shared cluster borders 
and emphasizes the significance of accurate segmentation in 
medical imaging for successful diagnosis. The proposed 
algorithm uses orthogonal principles to create pixel clusters 
and transforms image data into indeterminate representation 
sets in order to improve segmentation accuracy. The 
outcomes showed that the novel approach outperformed the 
most advanced techniques for quality clustering. Several 
other efficient algorithms have been proposed to handle 
different healthcare problems can be studied by referring to 
[16-19]. 
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Data
set Description
The work uses Tufts Dental Dataset, a dataset consisting of 
real-time dental X-ray images provided by Tufts University 
to comprehensively analyze the performance of the model.  
Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed study 
It includes 1,000 panoramic dental radiographs, each 
profe
ssionally annotated with details on teeth and 
anomalies. The dataset folder contains X-ray images, teeth 
masks, maxillomandibular masks, and abnormality masks. 
Five aspects were used to classify these images: anatomical 
location, peripheral features, radiation density, and impacts 
on the surrounding structure. It has images of different 
patients' teeth and dental architecture, which enables 
researchers to create and evaluate algorithms for dental 
problem diagnosis. The collection includes pictures captured 
at various resolutions, as well as a range of dental diseases. 
Additionally, the data set is used for additional dental 
diagnostic applications such as bone structure analysis, 
cavity identification, and tooth segmentation. 
B. Proposed Methodology
The methodology proposed in the paper develops a novel 
combination of U-Net++ model and Efficient Channel 
Attention mechanism for enhanced teeth segmentation. For 
the selection of U-Net++ as the backbone of the proposed 
segmentation model, the study implemented six other state-
of-art segmentation models to identify the best performing 
baseline model on the underlying dataset.  
U-Net++ is derived from the simple U-Net, with
additional convolutional layers and dense skip connections 
to improve the feature extraction of different details and 
merging them respectively. The architecture features 
alternating contracting and expansive pathways. The 
contracting path applies convolution and pooling operations 
for the prediction of contextual information, while the 
expansive path includes up-sampling and concatenation to 
predict the pixel location. Interlayer jump connections that 
define how one layer connects to the subsequent layer help 
in maintaining location information to enable accurate 
segmentation.  
As presented in Figure 2, the model includes five blocks in 
the encoding phase and decoding phase. In encoding phase 
each block is a combination of convolutional layers 
followed by batch normalization and max pooling layers. 
Max-pooling layers are used for downsampling and dropout 
layers for regularization. The extraction of the bottleneck 
layer is done at a very high level of abstraction. In the 
decoding or the expansive path the upsample of the feature 
map by way of transposed convolution to the output 
resolution connect skip connections to concatenate features 
from the encoder or contracting path before convoluting the 
data.  
Fig. 2. U-Net++ Architecture 
C. Effic
ient Channel Attention Network:
The baseline U-Net++ model is leveraged by integrating the 
Efficient channel attention network layer into the UNet++ 
model at its most complex level, named the bottleneck as 
1319
--- PAGE 4 ---
presented in Figure 3. Efficient Channel Attention Network 
(ECA-Net) is a lightweight and effective attention 
mechanism designed to improve feature representation by 
focusing on important channel-wise information. For 
downsampling the feature maps to have a single value per 
channel, it applies global average pooling layer followed by 
a 1D convolution layer to capture the interaction at local 
cross-channel level. Last but not the least, it computes the 
attention weights by employing sigmoid activation followed 
by the use of these weights to scale the input feature. This 
attention mechanism helps to achieve better feature 
representation because it allows to focus on the most 
informative channel. It is necessary to normalize and resize 
the pictures and masks during the training process.  
Due to blending with the ECA-Net layer, the model can 
capture small details and get a very large boost in 
segmentation performance without suffering a very high 
computational load. UNet++ enhances the feature maps 
through the channel attention block applied channel-wise 
after the ECA layer post-bottleneck. We can assist 
segmentation attempts through the usage of the weighted 
feature maps as it focuses on the relevant data. The resulting 
maps are then up-sampled before a further segmentation 
step.This makes the ECA-Net integrated UNet++ a very 
effective and potent architecture for medical picture 
segmentation and associated tasks to leverage on the 
improved feature representation and the effective channel 
wise attention for enhanced performance. 
Fig. 3. The proposed UNet++ model integrated with Efficient Channel 
Attent
ion Network (ECA-Net) for teeth segmentation. 
D. PILOT STUDY
For t
he purpose of this study, the work implements different 
state-of-art segmentation models for baseline model 
selection and comprehensive comparisons to prove the 
robustness of the proposed model 
U-shaped neural network (U-Net):
The U-Net architecture features alternating contracting and 
expansive pathways. The contracting consists convolution 
layers followed by pooling layers that aids in predicting the 
contextual information. On the other hand, the expansive 
path includes up-sampling layers and concatenation layers 
to predict the pixel location. Interlayer jump connections 
connecting the layers to the subsequent layers 
maintainlocation information to enable accurate 
segmentation. U-Net effectively achieves one-to-one 
mapping of objects in images due to its capability to learn 
from sparse training and thereby segment images for a 
number of applications. 
Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs): 
Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) are designed for 
semantic segmentation, performing pixel-level segmentation 
through an end-to-end approach with a backbone 
architecture. For the input images, they employ the 
convolutional layers to perform the density prediction of the 
images. FCNs perform segmentation tasks by preserving 
aspects of spatial information and adapting well to input 
image size. This makes them applicable to many images 
where need for segmentation of pictures is of the essence 
particularly when the spatial topography is critical. 
 Efficient Neural Network (ENet): 
Efficient Neural Network (ENet) is developed especially to 
perform real-time semantic segmentation in scenarios with 
limited hardware resources. It uses bottleneck layers, 
asymmetric convolutions, and deep separable convolutions 
for achieving a high degree of segmentation and reduced  
computational costs. Specifically, ENet also aggregates 
spatial and channel-wise features for accurate pixel-level 
context description in a small window footprint, so that 
efficient pixel-wise predictions can be made. 
U-Net3+
U-Net 3+ adds multi-resolution merging, attention
mechanisms to the original U-Net architecture. It includes
convolutional dense blocks and feature pyramid attention
modules for enhancement of features agreement and for
acquisition of multi-scale collective context information.
Even more, the usage of a global context module increases
the awareness of the scene as a whole and results in
increased accuracy and entity segmentation repeatability.
SwiftNet: 
SwiftNet is a convolutional neural network for real-time 
semantic segmentation where the resource efficient 
operations are made suitable for edge devices. It utilizes the 
depth-wise separable convolution type and efficient spatial 
pyramid pooling to obtain high visibility with low 
computational requirements. To overcome these challenges 
SwiftNet integrates contexts at multi-scales through a 
feature fusion technique which minimizes energy 
consumption and the response time of the machines 
involved. This makes it ideal for a variety of applications in 
edge computing 
IV. EXPERIMENTATION AND RESULTS
The in
put images are initially normalized and thresholded to 
obtain binary masks. An additional subclass to the 
DataGenerator class is created to handle the images and 
1320
--- PAGE 5 ---
masks in batches. All the models implemented are trained 
using
 the same parameter settings to maintain consistency in 
model learning environments. Binary cross entropy loss and 
Adam optimizer are used by the models to learn the dataset 
features efficiently with a learning rate of 0.0001. The 
models are trained for 100 epochs and are compounded with 
early stopping so as to reduce both training and validation 
loss and to avoid over-fitting of the models. 
The models evaluate their segmentation 
performance based on the set of standard metrics namely, 
Accuracy, Intersection over Union, Dice Coefficient, Peak 
Signal to Noise ratio, F-score, and Mean average Precision 
(mAP) performance metrics. Higher values of accuracy, 
IoU, dice coefficient, peal signal to noise ratio (PSNR), F-
score and mAP indicate good results. Dice Coefficientis 
used in image segmentation measures similarity between 
predicted and ground truth masks, PSNR quantifies the 
quality of a compressed or reconstructed image by 
measuring the ratio between the maximum signal power and 
the power of noise, mAP measures a model's performance in 
object detection by averaging the average precision across 
classes and IoU measures the overlap between the predicted 
and ground truth masks in object detection and 
segmentation. 
TABEL I. TRAINING, VALIDATION AND TESTING LOSS METRICS OBTAINED 
BY DIFFERENT MODELS ON THE TOOTH SEGMENTATION DATASET. 
Table I presents the loss and the accuracy values obtained 
by the different models for training, validation and testing 
phases over epochs. It can be seen that all the state-of-art 
models performed decently on the dataset but the SwiftNet 
model. It obtained the worst results with accuracies between 
68% to 75%. It is clearly evident that amongst the baseline 
models, UNet++ achieved the best learning on the dataset, 
thereby, making it a strong candidate for the backbone of 
the proposed model. The proposed model that leverages the 
UNet++ model with ECA-Net attention mechanism obtains 
the highest accuracy and the least loss values for all the 
three data sets.  
Figure 4 depicts the loss curve obtained for the proposed 
UNet++ model with ECA-Net attention mechanism. The 
graph demonstrates a good learning fit obtained by the 
model. The training loss and the validation loss reduced 
drastically during the initial 10 epochs with a gradual 
decrease between 10 to 20 epochs. The curve starts 
saturating after 20th epoch depicting a good model fit on the 
dataset. It is evident that ECA-Net attention model with U-
Net++ can perform high-quality segmentation for the input 
modality. 
Next, the comparisons amongstdifferent models in Table II 
proves that the proposed UNet++ model enhanced with 
Efficient channel attentionperforms the best over-all based 
on PSNR, Dice coefficient, mAP and accuracy metrics. 
UNet++ with ECA Net achieves a Dice coefficient of 0.907 
and a PSNR of 16.77, suggesting strong segmentation 
accuracy and high-quality image retention. Also, UNet++’s 
selection as a baseline model is supported by a remarkable 
map=92% and Dice coefficient = 841.6%. 
Fig. 4. Loss curve obatined  by the proposed UNet++ with ECA-NET 
attention mechanism for tooth segmentation.     
UNet++ with ECA-Net mechanism’s higher 
metrics underscore its superior ability to accurately segment 
images and retain image quality. The overall results 
demonstrate that while attention mechanisms significantly 
enhance the UNet++ architecture, the ECA attention 
mechanism is the preferred choice for automated tooth 
identification and segmentation in X-ray images with the 
highest accuracy of 97%. 
TABEL II. PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF DIFFERENT MODELS AGAINST 
THE PROPOSED MODEL ON THE TOOTH SEGMENTATION DATASET. 
These metric values suggest that, the proposed model has 
enhanced generalization and segmentation ability due to the 
integration of ECA-Net mechanism. On the other hand, with 
the lowest Dice coefficient and PSNR scores, SwiftNet and 
the Efficient Neural Network appear to be unsuitable for 
Models 
Train 
Validation Test 
Loss Acc Loss Acc Loss Acc 
U-Net 0.223 0.906 0.239 0.901 0.234 0.902 
FCN 0.174 0.911 0.171 0.913 0.176 0.908 
ENet 0.191 0.915 0.317 0.895 0.293 0.899 
U-Net++ 0.063 0.975 0.074 0.970 0.072 0.970 
U-Net3+ 0.183 0.913 0.198 0.906 0.192 0.908 
Swift Net 0.592 0.757 0.609 0.683 0.615 0.680 
UNet++ 
ECA Ne
t 
(Proposed) 
0.046 0.981 0.053 0.979 0.053 0.978 
Models Loss Dice PSNR mAP Acc 
U-Net 0.234 0.533 10.10 0.513 0.902 
FCN 0.171 0.669 10.39 0.608 0.908 
ENet 0.317 0.393 9.986 0.478 0.899 
U-Net++ 0.054 0.816 18.04 0.920 0.970 
U-Net3+ 0.198 0.557 10.04 0.573 0.908 
Swift Net 0.609 0.157 4.96 0.118 0.680 
UNet++ with 
 ECA Net 
(Propo
sed) 
0.053 0.907 16.77 0.964 0.978 
1321
--- PAGE 6 ---
tooth segmentation while U-Net, Fully convoltuional 
netwo
rk, UNet3+ obtained very average performance with 
their Dice coefficient ranging between 50% to 60%.  
Fig. 5 presents the graphical results of the segmentation 
mask generated by the proposed ECA-Net integrated 
UNet++ approach on the sample images from tooth 
segmentation dataset. It can be seen clearly that the 
segmentation masks generated by the proposed model is 
very much similar to the ground truth masks. Infact, sharper 
segmentation results are obtained that are able to distinguish 
between different teeth. 
Fig. 5. Segmentation of Dental Xray using the proposed segmentation 
model 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
The work presented in this paper indicated that the 
baseline U-Net++ model consistently outperformed other 
models namely, U-net, FCN, ENet, U-net3+ and SwiftNet 
for dental segmentation by having low values of loss, high 
IoU, Dice coefficient values and high PSNR and mAP 
values. Further integrating U-Net with Efficient Channel 
Attention Network improved the model’s performance, with 
the IoU of 0.830 and the Dice coefficient of 0. 907. This 
implies enhanced segmentation skills and abilities in the 
respective marketing organizations. These conclusions all 
substantiate the generalization that the integration of 
enhanced attention mechanism improved segmentation and 
offers a solid and highly efficient solution for demanding 
segmentation. More research studies can be done to 
innovate and combined with other modern strategies like 
transformers, multi-head attention mechanisms etc. to 
enhance the efficiency of the segmentation in the future to 
enhance the diagnostic capacities of dentistry and contribute 
to creating better treatment strategies. 
. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Lee, J.H., Kim, D.H., Jeong, S.N. and Choi, S.H., 2018. Detection and 
diagnosis of dental caries using a deep learning-based convolutional 
neural network algorithm. Journ al of dentistry, 77, pp.106-111. 
[2] Sajid, S., Hussain, S. and Sarwar, A., 2019. Brain tumor detection and 
segmentation in MR images using deep learning. Arabi an Journal for
Science and Engineering, 44, p p.9249-9261. 
[3]Stember, J.N., Celik, H., Krupinski, E., Chang, P.D., Mutasa, S., Wood,
B.J., Lignelli, A., Moonis, G., Schwartz, L.H., Jambawalikar, S. and 
Bagci, U., 2019. Eye tracking for deep learning segmentation using 
convolutional neural networks. Journ al of digital imaging, 32, pp.597-
604. 
[4] Muresan, M.P., Barbura, A.R. and Nedevschi, S., 2020, September.
Teeth detection and dental problem classification in panoramic X-ray 
images using deep learning and image processing techniques. In 2020 
IEEE 16th International Conference on Intelligent Computer
Communication and Processing (ICCP) (pp.  457-463). IEEE.
[5]Panetta, K., Rajendran, R., Ramesh, A., Rao, S.P. and Agaian, S., 2021.
Tufts dental database: a multimodal panoramic x-ray dataset for
benchmarking diagnostic systems. IEEE journal of biomedical and 
health informatics, 26(4),  pp.1650-1659. 
[6] Almalki, S.A., Alsubai, S., Alqahtani, A. and Alenazi, A.A., 2023. 
Denoised encoder-based residual U-net for precise teeth image
segmentation and damage prediction on panoramic
radiographs. Journ al of Dentistry, 137, p.104651.. 
[7] Ghahremani, T., Hoseyni, M., Ahmadi, M.J., Mehrabi, P. and 
Nikoofard, A., 2023, December. Advanced Deep Learning-Based
Approach for Tooth Detection, and Dental Cavity and Restoration
Segmentation in X-Ray Images. In 2023 11th RSI International
Conference on Robotics and Mechatronics (ICRoM)  (pp.  701-707).
IEEE.
[8] Karacan, M.H. and Yücebas, S.C., 2022, June. A deep learning model 
with attention mechanism for dental image segmentation. In 2022 
International Congress on Human-Computer Interaction, Optimization
and Robotic Applications (HORA) (pp.  1-4). IEEE.
[9] Fariza, A., Arifin, A.Z. and Astuti, E.R., 2020, October. Automatic 
Tooth and Background Segmentation in Dental X-ray Using U-Net
Convolution Network. In 2020 6th International Conference on
Science in Information Technology (ICSITech) (pp.  144-149). IEEE. 
[10] Rohrer, C., Krois, J., Patel, J., Meyer-Lueckel, H., Rodrigues, J.A. and 
Schwendicke, F., 2022. Segmentation of dental restorations on
panoramic radiographs using deep learning. Diagn ostics, 12(6),
p.1316. 
[11] Hou, S., Zhou, T., Liu, Y., Dang, P., Lu, H. and Shi, H., 2023. Teeth 
U-Net: A segmentation model of dental panoramic X-ray images for
context semantics and contrast enhancement. Compu ters in Biology
and Medicine, 152, p.106296. 
[12] Çelik, B., Savaştaer, E.F., Kaya, H.I. and Çelik, M.E., 2023. The role
of deep learning for periapical lesion detection on panoramic 
radiographs. Dento maxillofacial Radiology, 52(8), p.20230118. 
[13] Silva, B., Pinheiro, L., Oliveira, L. and Pithon, M., 2020, November.
A study on tooth segmentation and numbering using end-to-end deep
neural networks. In 2020 33rd SIBGRAPI conference on graphics, 
patterns and images (SIBGRAPI) (pp.  164-171). IEEE. 
[14] Chahal, E.S., Haritosh, A., Gupta, A., Gupta, K. and Sinha, A., 2019,
October. Deep learning model for brain tumor segmentation & 
analysis. In 2019 3rd International conference on recent developments 
in control, automation & power engineering (RDCAPE) (pp.  378-383).
IEEE.
[15]Ali, M., Khan, M. and Tung, N.T., 2018. Segmentation of dental X-ray 
images in medical imaging using neutrosophic orthogonal 
matrices. Expert Systems with Applications, 91, pp.434-441. 
[16]Resmi, S., Singh, R.P. and Palaniappan, K., 2024. Automated Cervical 
Cytology Image Cell Segmentation Using Enhanced MultiResUNet
with DCT and Spectral Domain Attention Mechanisms. IEEE Access. 
[17] Resmi, S., Singh, R.P. and Palaniappan, K., 2024. Automa t ic Skull
Shape Completion of Defective Skulls Using Transformers for Cranial 
Implant Design. Proce dia Computer Science, 235, pp.3305-3314. 
[18] Garrepalli, V., Gupta, V., Abhishek, S. and Anjali, T., 2 024, May.
Empowering oral healthcare: Cnn-assisted diagnosis for improved
patient outcomes. In 2024 Second International Conference on Data 
Science and Information System (ICDSIS) (pp.  1-5). IEEE. 
[19] Das, P., Thimmaraju, M.K., Ahalya, N., Anandaram, H. and Kumar,
A., 2022, October. Design and Comparison of Transfer Learning for 
Dental Caries Detection. In 2022 International Conference on Edge
Computing and Applications (ICECAA) (pp.  1311-1316). IEEE.
1322